* uhv

* unit 1

  1. Understanding the need, basic guidelines, content and process for Value Education What is Value Education

  - vbe : ( instills ethnic and basic values into one's psyche )
  - vae : ( what is valuable for human )

** importance of va

   - improve
   - examine and control
   - clarity clear
   - happy and harmonious human society

** fundamental values

   - right conduct : ( self-help, social, ethical )
   - peace
   - truth
   - love
   - non-violence : (psychological, social)

** need for value education

   The purpose of Value education is to facilitate the development of clarity on the aspiration 
   and adequate competence to actualize it.

   - value education answers what to do ?
   - skill development answers how to do ?


** guidelines for value education

   - universal
   - rational
   - natural and verifiable
   - all encompassing
   - leading to harmony

   2. define self exploration what is content of self exploration

   Self exploration is the process to find out what is valuable to me by investigating within myself. What is
   right for me and true for me has to be judged within myself. Once we start paying attention towards
   investigating into our present beliefs and aspirations, we get to know whether our aspirations and what
   we really want to be (i.e. what is naturally acceptable to us) are one and the same or not. If they are the
   same, then it’s no problem. But if the two are different, it means that we are leading a life against our
   natural acceptance. Such a life cannot bring us happiness.
   Self exploration is a process of discovering that there is something innate, invariant and universal in all
   human beings. This enables us to look at the confusions and contradictions within us and resolve them
   by becoming aware of our natural acceptance. Once we start observing inside, we can achieve harmony
   at all levels of our living

** content of self exploration
   -  the desire or goal or aspiration
   - the program

** purpose of self-exploration

   - Self exploration helps us to identify our innateness (Svatva) and move towards Self-Organization (Swantantrata) and Self-Expression (Swarajya).
   - self exploration is the process of dialogue between who you are and what you want to be
   - It is a process of dialogue between ‘what you are’ and ‘what you really want to be’.
   - It is a process of self evolution through self-investigation.
   - It is a process of knowing oneself and through that, knowing the entire existence.
   - It is a process of recognizing one’s relationship with every unit in existence and fulfilling it.
   - It is a process of knowing human conduct, human character and living accordingly.
   - It is a process of being in harmony with oneself and in harmony with entire existence.
   - what is the goal and how to achieve it
   - svathva (innateness  of self)
   - swatantratantra (being self-organized)
   - swarajya (self-expression, self-extension)

** process of self exploration

   - natural acc
   - experimental validation

** natural acceptance

   - does not change with time/age
   - does not depend on place
   - doesnot depend on beliefs and past conditionings
   - always there within us
   - same for all of us

** preconditioning shit is there
   - beliefs : (manyatas)

   3. continuous happiness and prosperity

** basic human aspirations
   - continuous happiness
   - prosperity
   - wealth

** The false notions of happiness and Prosperity have affected human living at all four levels:
   - At the level of Individual: (Problems of depression, psychological disorders, suicides, stress, insecurity,
   psycho-somatic diseases, loneliness etc.)
   - At the level of family: (Breaking of Joint families, mistrust, conflict between older and younger
   generations, insecurity in relationships, divorce, dowry tortures, family feuds, wasteful expenditures in
   family functions etc.)
   - At the level of Society: (Terrorism, naxalism, communism, casteism, racial, ethnic struggles, wars between
   nations, genocide, nuclear genetic warfare.)
   - At the level of Nature: (Global Warming, pollution, depletion of mineral resources, deforestation, loss of
   soil fertility.)

** svdd, ssdd, ssss

   - svsd : (sadhan viheen dukhi daridra)
   - ssdd : (sadhan sampaan dukhi daridra)
   - ssss : (sadhan sampaam sukhi samriddha)

   4. the basic requirements for fulfillment of aspirations of every human being with their correct priority

   - right understanding
   - good relationships
   - physical facilities

** consequences of trend summarized

   - at the level of an individual
   - at the level of family
   - at the level of society
   - at the level of nature

   5. Understanding Happiness and Prosperity correctly-

** symptoms of happy person

   - integrity
   - embraced the living in the moment
   - gratitude
   - satisfied work
   - harmonious
   - afraid of change
   - enjoy simple things

** levels of human being

   - myself : (write all mental discorders)
   - family : (all family problems)
   - society : (write all country level problems)
   - nature/ existence : (pollutiona and stuff)

* unit 2

  1. understanding human being as coexistence of i (self) and body

**  infinte physical facilities

    - from (necessary and useful) => (to unnecessary but useful) => (unnecessary and useless) => (intolerable)
    - feeling and expression 
    - we want feeling naturally accepting continuous and not expression 

** general
   - fullfillment -> recognition -> assumption -> knowledge

** I (doer, seer, and enjoyer)
   - knowing assuming recognition and fullfilling
** body 
   - recognizing and fullfilling

** sukh
   - happiness
   - opposite of dukh
   - happiness depends upon thinking
** suvidha
   - opposite of aa-suvidha
   - physical comfort

** needs of human beings
   - physiological
   - safety and security
   - love and belonging
   - esteem

** kinds of activities
   - that are going on in self 
   - that are going on in body
   - that are going on in self and body

** characteristics of i
   - creative, passionate, motivated

** sanyam
   - self control
   - self realization
   - spititual quest
   - will power
   - self discipline
   - sanyam is the basis to swasthya

** three responsibilities
   - nurturing
   -- ingestion, digestion, excretion
   - protection
   -- proper upkeep, labour, physical excercise, asan, treatment
   - right utilization

** conflicts and contradictions in i and body 
   - wavering aspirations, lack of self confidence, unhappiness, lack of qualitative improvement, state of registration.
** improvement of health
   - Nursuring of the body, Protection of the body, Proper upkeen (vihar) of the body, Labour, Asanas/ Pranayam, Treatment of the body, Right utilization of the body (sadupyog).

* unit 3

** feelings in relationship
   - Trust (vishwas)
   - Respect (sammana)
   - Affection (sneha)
   - Care (mamta)
   - Guidance (vatsalya)
   - Reverence (shraddha)
   - Glory (guarava)
   - Gratitude (kritagyata)
   - Love (prem)
** evaluation
   - under
   - over
   - otherwise
** intention and competence
   - intention : (wanting to - our natural acceptance)
   - competence : (being able to)

** respect as right evaluation
   - our purpose is the same
   - our program is the same
   - our potential is the same

** differentiation and discriminaiton
   - body 
   - physical facilitate
   - beliefs

** differentiation
   - gender
   - race
   - age
   - pysical strength 
   - wealth
   - post
   - isms
   - sect

** programs needed to achieve comprehensive human goal
   1. Education-Sanskar
   2. Health-Self regulation
   3. Production-Work
   4. Justice-Preservation
   5. Exchange-Storage

** innateness

   Innateness means qualities which are innate to the unit. Each unit in existence
   exhibits an innateness, an intrinsic quality that cannot be separated from it. We
   refer this principle as innateness also called dharana of that unit. This is intrinsic to
   the unit.

   - existence for material order
   - existence and growth for plant order
   - existence and growth and will to live for animal order
   - existence and growth and will to live and happiness in i

** natural characteristics
   - comp/decomp
   - + nurture
   - + cruelty and non in i
   - + perceverence(dhirata), generosity(virata), bravery(udarata) in i

** conformance
   - Each unit conforms through the principle of conformance or anusangita. It means how the 
     continuity of the fundamental nature of the unit is preserved.
   - constitution
   - seed
   - breed
   - right values/ sanskara

** activity in order
   - comp/dcomp
   - + respiration
   - + selection
   - + thought and desire

* unit 5

  - utility value (upiyogita mulya)
  - artistic value (kala mulya)

** definiteiveness
   - value
   - policy
   - character

** salient features of professional ethics
   - clarity about comprehensive human goal
   - confidence in oneself
   - mutually fulfilling behavior
   - mutually enriching interaction with nature

** corruptions
   - Corruption in multiple forms and at various levels.
   - Tax evasion, misappropriation and misuse of public funds.
   - Misleading propaganda, unethical advertisements and sale promotion.
   - Cut-throat competition.
   - Exploiting the weakness of consumers through various enticements
   - Adulteration and spurious production
   - Endangering the health and safety of public at large. 
   - Hoarding and over-charging etc.

   - humanistic education : (animal to human consciousness)
   - humanistic constitution : (set of policies for humans follow for walfare of manking)

** human values affect life of professionals
   - attitude to work
   - work ethics ans quality of work life
   - organizational values
   - persuit of excellence

** nice tech

   • Catering to real human needs
   • Compatible with natural systems and cycles
   • Facilitating effective utilization of human body, animals, plants and materials
   • Safe, user-friendly and conducive to health
   • Producible with local resources and expertise as far as possible
   • Promoting the use of renewable energy resources
   • Low cost and energy efficient
   • Enhancing human interaction and cooperation

** Characteristics of People-friendly production Systems:
   - Resilience: The art of pushing through even when things get a bit difficult
   - Empathy: The ability to connect compassionately and identify with the unique experiences of others.
   - Patience: Keeping cool when things don’t automatically go your way
   - Sacrifice: Forgoing your own satisfaction for someone else’s
   - Politeness: Learning manners and being considerate of others.
   - Humour: Seeing the funny side of situations and being able to laugh at oneself.
   - Self-awareness: Being accountable for your actions by being considerate to who you are.
   - Hope: The belief in all the great things that are yet to come, and knowing that there is something better on the horizon.
   - Confidence: Having the ability to believe in yourself and taking risks.

** sustinable dev shit

** stratergies for going from present state to universal human order
   - Promoting Mass awareness and moving towards Humanistic Education
   - Developing Holistic Model of Living
   - Implementing Strict Policies and Social System
